# Metal-Detector
Metal detector in C
Name: Aarushi Mehra
Student number: 
Project 2: Metal Detector with additional features using the EFM8 board

CONSTRUCTION: 

I built this circuit using the schematic given in the project 2 pdf and lecture slides. 
The components were chosen according to the said guidelines and schematics. 
I used the EFM8 board as my microcontroller. The metal is detected when the oscillator frequency 
changes due to the change in magnetic field of the inductor when a metal is brought closer to it. 

 
BUILDING OF SOFTWARE:

I used the FREQ_EFM8.c provided by Dr Jesus Calvino Fraga as the base for this project. 
The frequency depends on the inductor and can be increased by using multiple inductors.
To detect a metal within 1 cm range of the inductor, I measured the frequency first using
 putty and then added logic for the buzzer to buzz when the frequency of the inductor when a 
metal is detected matches. I integrated the pwm code for buzzer with the frequency code to make
 the metal detector function. After doing so, I added the LCD code along with several additional features to the original file. 

EXTRA FEATURES: 
 
1)	First additional feature: For UI, I initially just had the LCD display when a metal is 
detected and when it is not. Then, I added the feature for LCD to tell how far approximately the 
detected metal is. It has three ranges available. It displays when the metal is 1 cm away, 0 cm 
away, and more than 3 cm away. The last option where the distance is more than 3 cm is when no
 metal is detected and the buzzer does sound. 

2)	My second additional feature is for the metal detector to distinguish between different types
 of metals. It distinguishes between gold, aluminium, a dollar coin, a cent, and a big metal (for example, my phone).
 It does so by measuring the frequency of the inductor generated by bringing the metal close to it and then classifying each category.

3)	My third additional feature is that I added another inductor to the metal detector to strengthen 
it and increase its frequency. This is useful in detecting metals big in size, like a mobile phone. This 
method even though useful, is a bit jittery as I noticed that the frequency tends to change according to the 
force the metal is touched to the inductor with. 

REFERENCES: 

For reference, I used the documentation provided in this course. I used the datasheet for the EFM8 
board and various programming examples provided my Dr Jesus Calvino Fraga.

OPERATION: 

My metal detector works for all different types of coins of varying sizes and metal densities. 
When a metal is brought to a proximity of around 1.5 cm, the buzzer sounds. The LCD simultaneously 
displays when the metal detected is 0 cm away, 1 cm, or more than 3 cm away. 
The metal detector can also be used to detect different kinds of metals of different sizes. 
More inductors could be added to increase the strength of the magnetic field generated. 
